Camp population changes for diphtheria model (#158)
epiverse-trace/epidemics: vignettes/diphtheria.Rmd

editor_options: 
  chunk_output_type: console
---

```{r, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>",
  message = FALSE,
  warning = FALSE,
  fig.width = 5,
  fig.height = 4,
  dpi = 300
)
```

::: {.alert .alert-warning}
**New to _epidemics_?** It may help to read the ["Get started"](epidemics.html) vignette first!
:::

This vignette shows how to model an outbreak of diphtheria (or other diseases) within the setting of a humanitarian aid camp, where the camp population may fluctuate due to external factors, including influxes from the affected area and evacuations to other camps or to other areas.
In such situations, implementing large-scale public health measures such as non-pharmaceutical interventions on social contacts or mass vaccination may be impractical.

_epidemics_ provides a simple SEIHR compartmental model based on @finger2019, in which it is possible to vary the population of each demographic group throughout the model's simulation time.
This model only tracks infections by demographic groups, and does not include demographic variation in contacts, as this is assumed to be less important in the camp setting.

> The model also does not allow interventions on social contacts, and does not include a 'vaccinated' compartment.

Reviewer: Perhaps add a link to the vaccine vignette if people are interested in this for a stable population?

However, the model does allow for seasonality in model parameters and interventions on model parameters.
Similarly, the model allows for a proportion of the initial camp population to be considered vaccinated and thus immune from infection.

```{r setup}
library(epidemics)
library(dplyr)
library(ggplot2)
```

## Modelling an outbreak with pre-existing immunity

> We create a population object corresponding to the Kutupalong camp in Bangladesh, rounded to the nearest 100, as described in Additional file 1 provided with @finger2019.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We create a population object corresponding to the Kutupalong camp in Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh in 2017-18, rounded to the nearest 100, as described in Additional file 1 provided with @finger2019.
```

This population has three age groups, < 5 years, 5 -- 14 years, $\geq$ 15 years.
We assume that only one individual is infectious in each age group.

```{r camp-population}
# three age groups with five compartments SEIHR
n_age_groups <- 3
demography_vector <- c(83000, 108200, 224600)
initial_conditions <- matrix(0, nrow = n_age_groups, ncol = 5)

# 1 individual in each group is infectious
initial_conditions[, 1] <- demography_vector - 1
initial_conditions[, 3] <- rep(1, n_age_groups)

# camp social contacts are assumed to be uniform
camp_pop <- population(
  contact_matrix = matrix(1, nrow = n_age_groups, ncol = n_age_groups),
  demography_vector = demography_vector,
  initial_conditions = initial_conditions / demography_vector
)

camp_pop
```

> We assume, following @finger2019, that 20% of the 5 -- 14 year-olds are vaccinated against and immune to diphtheria, but that coverage is much lower among other age groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We assume, following @finger2019, that 20% of the 5 -- 14 year-olds were vaccinated against (and immune to) diphtheria prior to the start of the outbreak, but that coverage is much lower among other age groups.
```

```{r}
# 20% of 5-14 year-olds are vaccinated
prop_vaccinated <- c(0.05, 0.2, 0.05)
```

We run the model with its default parameters, assuming that:

> - diphtheria has an $\R_0$ of 4.0 and a mean infectious period of 4.5 days, giving a transmissibility ($\beta$) of about 0.889;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- diphtheria has an $R_0$ of 4.0 and a mean infectious period of 4.5 days, giving a transmissibility ($\beta$) of about 0.889;
```

> - diphtheria has an $\R_0$ of 4.0 and a mean infectious period of 4.5 days, giving a transmissibility ($\beta$) of about 0.889;

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/epidemics/pull/158/commits/dc227b69713ba9d893863db3b51e927ee2f34999

  ) +
  labs(
    x = "Simulation time (days)",
    y = "Individuals infectious"
  )
```

## Modelling an outbreak with changing population sizes

We now model the same outbreak, but with fluctuation in susceptible individuals towards the end of the outbreak, to illustrate the effect this could have on outbreak dynamics.
In this example, we do not assume any prior immunity.

We prepare a population change schedule as a named list giving the times of each change, and the corresponding changes to each demographic group.

Note that the model assumes that these changes apply _only to the susceptible compartment_, as we assume that the wider population entering the camp is not yet affected by diphtheria, and that infected or hospitalised individuals do not leave the camp.

```{r pop_change}
# susceptibles increase by about 12%, 92%, and 89% of initial sizes
pop_change <- list(
  time = 70,
  values = list(
    c(1e4, 1e5, 2e5)
  )
)
```

Here, the number of individuals increases by about 75% overall, which is well within reported values in real world scenarios [@finger2019].

```{r}
data <- model_diphtheria_cpp(
  population = camp_pop,
  population_change = pop_change
)
```

> ```{r class.source = 'fold-hide', fig.cap="Model results from a single run showing the number of individuals infectious with diphtheria over 100 days of the outbreak, with an increase in the camp population size."}

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/epidemics/pull/158/commits/dc227b69713ba9d893863db3b51e927ee2f34999

filter(data, compartment == "infectious") |>
  ggplot() +
  geom_line(
    aes(time, value, colour = demography_group)
  ) +
  geom_vline(
    xintercept = pop_change$time,
    colour = "red",
    linetype = "dashed",
    linewidth = 0.2
  ) +
  annotate(
    geom = "text",
    x = pop_change$time,
    y = 20e3,
    label = "Population increase",
    angle = 90,
    vjust = "inward",
    colour = "red"
  ) +
  scale_y_continuous(
    labels = scales::comma
  ) +
  scale_colour_brewer(
    palette = "Dark2",
    name = "Age group",
    labels = c("<5", "5-15", ">15")
  ) +
  expand_limits(
    x = c(0, 101)
  ) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(
    legend.position = "top"
  ) +
  labs(
    x = "Simulation time (days)",
    y = "Individuals infectious"
  )
```

> This example shows how an increase in the number of susceptibles in the population can lead to a rise in the number of infections and extend the duration of an outbreak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how an increase in the number of susceptibles in the population can lead to a rise in the transmission potential of the infection and therefore extend the duration of an outbreak.
```
